Aircraft without any human pilot on board UAV redirects here. For other uses see UAV disambiguation . Elbit Systems Hermes450 taking off Northrop Grumman Bat carrying EOIR and SAR sensors laser rangefinders laser designators infrared cameras A DJI Phantom quadcopter UAV for commercial and recreational aerial photography A General Atomics MQ9 Reaper  a hunterkiller surveillance UAV Although most large military UAVs are fixedwing aircraft  rotorcraft designs i.e. RUAVs such as this MQ8B Fire Scout are also used. An unmanned aerial vehicle  UAV  or unmanned aircraft system  UAS  commonly known as a drone  is an aircraft with no human pilot  crew or passengers on board. UAVs were originally developed through the twentieth century for military missions too dull dirty or dangerous  for humans and by the twentyfirst they had become essential assets to most militaries. As control technologies improved and costs fell their use expanded to many nonmilitary applications.  These include aerial photography  area coverage  precision agriculture  forest fire monitoring  river monitoring   environmental monitoring      policing and surveillance infrastructure inspections  smuggling  product deliveries  entertainment and drone racing . Terminology  Many terms are used for aircraft which fly without any persons on board. The term drone has been used from the early days of aviation  some being applied to remotely flown target aircraft used for practice firing of a battleships guns such as the 1920s Fairey Queen and 1930s de Havilland Queen Bee . Later examples included the Airspeed Queen Wasp and Miles Queen Martinet  before ultimate replacement by the GAF Jindivik .  The term remains in common use.  In addition to the software autonomous drones also employ a host of advanced technologies that allow them to carry out their missions without human intervention such as cloud computing computer vision artificial intelligence machine learning deep learning and thermal sensors.  For recreational uses an aerial photography drone is an aircraft that has firstperson video autonomous capabilities or both.  An unmanned aerial vehicle  UAV  is defined as a powered aerial vehicle that does not carry a human operator uses aerodynamic forces to provide vehicle lift can fly autonomously or be piloted remotely can be expendable or recoverable and can carry a lethal or nonlethal payload.  UAV is a term that is commonly applied to military use cases.  Missiles with warheads are generally not considered UAVs because the vehicle itself is a munition but certain types of propellerbased missile are often called  kamikaze drones  by the public and media. Also the relation of UAVs to remote controlled model aircraft is unclear  citation needed  UAVs may or may not include remotecontrolled model aircraft. Some jurisdictions base their definition on size or weight however the US FAA defines any unmanned flying craft as a UAV regardless of size.  citation needed  A similar term is remotely piloted aerial vehicle  RPAV . UAVs or RPAVs can also be seen as a component of an unmanned aircraft system  UAS  which also includes a groundbased controller and a system of communications with the aircraft.  The term UAS was adopted by the United States Department of Defense DoD and the United States Federal Aviation Administration FAA in 2005 according to their Unmanned Aircraft System Roadmap 20052030.  The International Civil Aviation Organization ICAO and the British Civil Aviation Authority adopted this term also used in the European Unions Single European Sky SES Air Traffic Management ATM Research SESAR Joint Undertaking roadmap for 2020.  This term emphasizes the importance of elements other than the aircraft. It includes elements such as ground control stations data links and other support equipment. Similar terms are unmanned aircraft vehicle system  UAVS  and remotely piloted aircraft system  RPAS .  Many similar terms are in use. Under new regulations which came into effect 1 June 2019 the term RPAS has been adopted by the Canadian Government to mean a set of configurable elements consisting of a remotely piloted aircraft its control station the command and control links and any other system elements required during flight operation.  Classification types  UAVs may be classified like any other aircraft  according to design configuration such as weight or engine type maximum flight altitude degree of operational autonomy operational role etc. According to the United States Department of Defense  UAVs are classified into five categories below   Group Group 1 Group 2 Group 3 Group 4 Group 5 Size Small Medium Large Larger Largest Max takeoff wt  20 lb 9.1 kg  20   55  55   1320 1320 lb 600 kg 1320 lb 600 kg Operating altitude  1200 ft 370 m  3500 ft 1100 m  18000 ft 5500 m  18000 ft 5500 m  18000 ft 5500 m Speed  100 kn 190 kmh  250 kn 460 kmh  250 kn 460 kmh Any speed Any speed Other classifications of UAVs include  Range and endurance  There are usually five categories when UAVs are classified by range and endurance  Category Very close range UAVs Close range UAVs Short range UAVs Medium range UAVs Long range UAVs Range km   5  5   50  50   150  150   650  650 Endurance hr  0.5  0.75 16 812 12  36 or 48  36 or 48 Size  There are usually four categories when UAVs are classified by size with at least one of the dimensions length or wingspan meet the following respective limits  Category MicroVery small UAVs MiniSmall UAVs Medium UAVs Large UAVs LengthWingspan   50 cm  50 cm   2 m 5 10 m  10 m Weight  Based on their weight drones can be classified into 5 categories Category Nano Micro air vehicles MAV Miniature UAV or Small SUAV Medium UAVs Large UAVs Weight   250 gm  250 gm  02  kg  02 kg  25  kg  25 kg  150  kg  150 kg .  Degree of autonomy  Drones could also be classified based on the degree of autonomy in their flight operations. ICAO classifies unmanned aircraft as either remotely piloted aircraft or fully autonomous.  Some UAVs offer intermediate degrees of autonomy. For example a vehicle may be remotely piloted in most contexts but have an autonomous returntobase operation. Some aircraft types may optionally fly manned or as UAVs which may include manned aircraft transformed into manned or Optionally Piloted UAVs OPVs. The flight of UAVs may operate under remote control by a human operator as remotely piloted aircraft  RPA  or with various degrees of autonomy  such as autopilot assistance up to fully autonomous aircraft that have no provision for human intervention.   Altitude  Based on the altitude the following UAV classifications have been used at industry events such as ParcAberporth Unmanned Systems forum Handheld 2000 ft 600 m altitude about 2 km range Close 5000 ft 1500 m altitude up to 10 km range NATO type 10000 ft 3000 m altitude up to 50 km range Tactical 18000 ft 5500 m altitude about 160 km range MALE medium altitude long endurance up to 30000 ft 9000 m and range over 200 km HALE high altitude long endurance over 30000 ft 9100 m and indefinite range Hypersonic highspeed supersonic Mach 15 or hypersonic Mach 5 50000 ft 15200 m or suborbital altitude range over 200 km Orbital low Earth orbit Mach 25 CIS Lunar EarthMoon transfer Computer Assisted Carrier Guidance System CACGS for UAVs Composite criteria  An example of classification based on the composite criteria is U.S. Militarys unmanned aerial systems UAS classification of UAVs based on weight maximum altitude and speed of the UAV component. Power Sources  UAVs can be classified based on their power or energy source which significantly impacts their flight duration range and environmental impact. The main categories include Batterypowered Electric These UAVs use rechargeable batteries offering quiet operation and lower maintenance but potentially limited flight times. The reduced noise levels make them suitable for urban environments and sensitive operations.  Fuelpowered Internal Combustion Utilizing traditional fuels like gasoline or diesel these UAVs often have longer flight times but may be noisier and require more maintenance. They are typically used for applications requiring extended endurance or heavy payload capacity.  Hybrid Combining electric and fuel power sources hybrid UAVs aim to balance the benefits of both systems for improved performance and efficiency. This configuration could allow for versatility in mission profiles and adaptability to different operational requirements.  Solarpowered Equipped with solar panels these UAVs can potentially achieve extended flight times by harnessing solar energy especially at high altitudes. Solarpowered UAVs may be particularly suited for longendurance missions and environmental monitoring applications.  Nuclearpowered While nuclear power has been explored for larger aircraft its application in UAVs remains largely theoretical due to safety concerns and regulatory challenges. Research in this area is ongoing but faces significant hurdles before practical implementation.  Hydrogen Fuel Cell An emerging technology hydrogen fuel cells offer the potential for longer flight times with zero emissions though the technology is still developing for widespread UAV use. The high energy density of hydrogen makes it a promising option for future UAV propulsion systems.  History  Main article History of unmanned aerial vehicles Winston Churchill and others waiting to watch the launch of a de Havilland Queen Bee target drone  6 June 1941 A Ryan Firebee  one of a series of target dronesunpiloted aerial vehicles that first flew in 1951. Israeli Air Force Museum  Hatzerim airbase Israel 2006 Last preparations before the first tactical UAV mission across the Suez canal 1969. Standing Major Shabtai Brill from the Israeli intelligence corps the innovator of the tactical UAV. The Israeli Tadiran Mastiff  which first flew in 1975 is seen by many as the first modern battlefield UAV due to its datalink system enduranceloitering and live videostreaming.  Early drones  The earliest recorded use of an unmanned aerial vehicle for warfighting occurred in July 1849  with a balloon carrier the precursor to the aircraft carrier   in the first offensive use of air power in naval aviation .    Austrian forces besieging Venice attempted to launch some 200 incendiary balloons at the besieged city. The balloons were launched mainly from land however some were also launched from the Austrian ship SMS Vulcano . At least one bomb fell in the city however due to the wind changing after launch most of the balloons missed their target and some drifted back over Austrian lines and the launching ship Vulcano .    The Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres Quevedo introduced a radiobased controlsystem called the Telekino  at the Paris Academy of Science in 1903 as a way of testing airships without risking human life.    Significant development of drones started in the 1900s and originally focused on providing practice targets for training military personnel . The earliest attempt at a powered UAV was A. M. Low s Aerial Target in 1916.  Low confirmed that Geoffrey de Havillands monoplane was the one that flew under control on 21 March 1917 using his radio system.  Following this successful demonstration in the spring of 1917 Low was transferred to develop aircraft controlled fast motor launches D.C.B.s with the Royal Navy in 1918 intended to attack shipping and port installations and he also assisted Wing Commander Brock in preparations for the Zeebrugge Raid . Other British unmanned developments followed leading to the fleet of over 400 de Havilland 82 Queen Bee aerial targets that went into service in 1935. Nikola Tesla described a fleet of uncrewed aerial combat vehicles in 1915.  These developments also inspired the construction of the Kettering Bug by Charles Kettering from Dayton Ohio and the HewittSperry Automatic Airplane  initially meant as an uncrewed plane that would carry an explosive payload to a predetermined target. Development continued during World War I when the DaytonWright Airplane Company invented a pilotless aerial torpedo that would explode at a preset time.  The film star and modelairplane enthusiast Reginald Denny developed the first scaled remote piloted vehicle in 1935.  Soviet researchers experimented with controlling Tupolev TB1 bombers remotely in the late 1930s.  World War II  In 1940 Denny started the Radioplane Company and more models emerged during World War II   used both to train antiaircraft gunners and to fly attackmissions. Nazi Germany produced and used various UAV aircraft during the war like the Argus As 292 and the V1 flying bomb with a jet engine . Fascist Italy developed a specialised drone version of the SavoiaMarchetti SM.79 flown by remote control although the Armistice with Italy was enacted prior to any operational deployment.  Postwar period  After World War II development continued in vehicles such as the American JB4 using televisionradiocommand guidance the Australian GAF Jindivik and Teledyne Ryan Firebee I of 1951 while companies like Beechcraft offered their Model 1001 for the U.S. Navy in 1955.  Nevertheless they were little more than remotecontrolled airplanes until the Vietnam War . In 1959 the U.S. Air Force  concerned about losing pilots over hostile territory began planning for the use of uncrewed aircraft.  Planning intensified after the Soviet Union shot down a U2 in 1960. Within days a highly classified UAV program started under the code name of Red Wagon.  The August 1964 clash in the Tonkin Gulf between naval units of the U.S. and the North Vietnamese Navy initiated Americas highly classified UAVs  Ryan Model 147  Ryan AQM91 Firefly  Lockheed D21  into their first combat missions of the Vietnam War .  When the Chinese government  showed photographs of downed U.S. UAVs via Wide World Photos   the official U.S. response was no comment. During the War of Attrition 19671970 in the Middle East Israeli intelligence tested the first tactical UAVs installed with reconnaissance cameras which successfully returned photos from across the Suez Canal. This was the first time that tactical UAVs that could be launched and landed on any short runway unlike the heavier jetbased UAVs were developed and tested in battle.  In the 1973 Yom Kippur War  Israel used UAVs as decoys to spur opposing forces into wasting expensive antiaircraft missiles.  After the 1973 Yom Kippur war a few key people from the team that developed this early UAV joined a small startup company that aimed to develop UAVs into a commercial product eventually purchased by Tadiran and leading to the development of the first Israeli UAV.   pages needed  In 1973 the U.S. military officially confirmed that they had been using UAVs in Southeast Asia Vietnam.  Over 5000 U.S. airmen had been killed and over 1000 more were missing or captured . The USAF 100th Strategic Reconnaissance Wing flew about 3435 UAV missions during the war  at a cost of about 554 UAVs lost to all causes. In the words of USAF General George S. Brown  Commander Air Force Systems Command  in 1972 The only reason we need UAVs is that we dont want to needlessly expend the man in the cockpit.  Later that year General John C. Meyer  Commander in Chief Strategic Air Command  stated we let the drone do the highrisk flying ... the loss rate is high but we are willing to risk more of them ...they save lives  During the 1973 Yom Kippur War  Sovietsupplied surfacetoair missile batteries in Egypt and Syria caused heavy damage to Israeli fighter jets . As a result Israel developed the IAI Scout as the first UAV with realtime surveillance.    The images and radar decoys provided by these UAVs helped Israel to completely neutralize the Syrian air defenses at the start of the 1982 Lebanon War  resulting in no pilots downed.  In Israel in 1987 UAVs were first used as proofofconcept of superagility poststall controlled flight in combatflight simulations that involved tailless stealthtechnologybased threedimensional thrust vectoring flightcontrol and jetsteering.  Modern UAVs  The Turkish STM Kargu was the first lethal autonomous weapon to attack enemy combatants in warfare. With the maturing and miniaturization of applicable technologies in the 1980s and 1990s interest in UAVs grew within the higher echelons of the U.S. military. The U.S. funded the Counterterrorism Center CTC within the CIA which sought to fight terrorism with the aid of modernized drone technology.  In the 1990s the U.S. DoD gave a contract to AAI Corporation along with Israeli company Malat. The U.S. Navy bought the AAI Pioneer UAV that AAI and Malat developed jointly. Many of these UAVs saw service in the 1991 Gulf War . UAVs demonstrated the possibility of cheaper more capable fightingmachines deployable without risk to aircrews. Initial generations primarily involved surveillance aircraft  but some carried armaments  such as the General Atomics MQ1 Predator  that launched AGM114 Hellfire airtoground missiles . CAPECON  a European Union project to develop UAVs  ran from 1 May 2002 to 31 December 2005.  As of 2012 update  the United States Air Force USAF employed 7494 UAVs   almost one in three USAF aircraft.   The Central Intelligence Agency also operated UAVs .  By 2013 at least 50 countries used UAVs. China Iran Israel Pakistan Turkey and others designed and built their own varieties. The use of drones has continued to increase.  Due to their wide proliferation no comprehensive list of UAV systems exists.   The development of smart technologies and improved electricalpower systems led to a parallel increase in the use of drones for consumer and general aviation activities. As of 2021 quadcopter drones exemplify the widespread popularity of hobby radiocontrolled aircraft and toys however the use of UAVs in commercial and general aviation is limited by a lack of autonomy  clarification needed  and by new regulatory environments which require lineofsight contact with the pilot.  citation needed  In 2020 a Kargu 2 drone hunted down and attacked a human target in Libya  according to a report from the UN Security Council s Panel of Experts on Libya published in March 2021. This may have been the first time an autonomous killerrobot armed with lethal weaponry attacked human beings.   Superior drone technology specifically the Turkish Bayraktar TB2  played a role in Azerbaijans successes in the 2020 NagornoKarabakh war against Armenia.  Artists concept of Ingenuity landing on Mars UAVs are also used in NASA missions. The Ingenuity helicopter is an autonomous UAV that operated on Mars from 2021 to 2024. Current the Dragonfly spacecraft is being developed and is aiming to reach and examine Saturn s moon Titan . Its primary goal is to roam around the surface expanding the amount of area to be researched previously seen by landers . As a UAV Dragonfly allows examination of potentially diverse types of soil. The drone is set to launch in 2027 and is estimated to take seven more years to reach the Saturnian system. Miniaturization is also supporting the development of small UAVs which can be used as individual system or in a fleet offering the possibility to survey large areas in a relatively small amount of time.  According to data from GlobalData  the global military uncrewed aerial systems UAS market which forms a significant part of the UAV industry is projected to experience a compound annual growth rate of 4.8 over the next decade. This represents a near doubling in market size from 12.5 billion in 2024 to an estimated 20 billion by 2034.  Design  General physical structure of a UAV Crewed and uncrewed aircraft of the same type generally have recognizably similar physical components. The main exceptions are the cockpit and environmental control system or life support systems . Some UAVs carry payloads such as a camera that weigh considerably less than an adult human and as a result can be considerably smaller. Though they carry heavy payloads weaponized military UAVs are lighter than their crewed counterparts with comparable armaments. Small civilian UAVs have no lifecritical systems  and can thus be built out of lighter but less sturdy materials and shapes and can use less robustly tested electronic control systems. For small UAVs the quadcopter design has become popular though this layout is rarely used for crewed aircraft. Miniaturization means that lesspowerful propulsion technologies can be used that are not feasible for crewed aircraft such as small electric motors and batteries. Control systems for UAVs are often different from crewed craft. For remote human control a camera and video link almost always replace the cockpit windows radiotransmitted digital commands replace physical cockpit controls. Autopilot software is used on both crewed and uncrewed aircraft with varying feature sets.    Aircraft configuration  UAVs can be designed in different configurations than manned aircraft both because there is no need for a cockpit and its windows and there is no need to optimize for human comfort although some UAVs are adapted from piloted examples or are designed for optionally piloted modes. Air safety is also less of a critical requirement for unmanned aircraft allowing the designer greater freedom to experiment. Instead UAVs are typically designed around their onboard payloads and their ground equipment. These factors have led to a great variety of airframe and motor configurations in UAVs. For conventional flight the flying wing and blended wing body offer light weight combined with low drag and stealth  and are popular configurations for many use cases. Larger types which carry a variable payload are more likely to feature a distinct fuselage with a tail for stability control and trim although the wing configurations in use vary widely. For uses that require vertical flight or hovering the tailless quadcopter requires a relatively simple control system and is common for smaller UAVs. Multirotor designs with 6 or more rotors is more common with larger UAVs where redundancy is prioritized.   Propulsion  Traditional internal combustion and jet engines remain in use for drones requiring long range. However for shorterrange missions electric power has almost entirely taken over. The distance record for a UAV built from balsa wood and mylar skin across the North Atlantic Ocean is held by a gasoline model airplane or UAV. Manard Hill in 2003 when one of his creations flew 1882 miles across the Atlantic Ocean on less than a gallon of fuel holds this record.  Besides the traditional piston engine the Wankel rotary engine is used by some drones. This type offers high power output for lower weight with quieter and more vibrationfree running. Claims have also been made for improved reliability and greater range.  citation needed  Small drones mostly use lithiumpolymer batteries LiPo while some larger vehicles have adopted the hydrogen fuel cell . The energy density of modern LiPo batteries is far less than gasoline or hydrogen. However electric motors are cheaper lighter and quieter. Complex multiengine multipropeller installations are under development with the goal of improving aerodynamic and propulsive efficiency. For such complex power installations battery elimination circuitry BEC may be used to centralize power distribution and minimize heating under the control of a microcontroller unit MCU. Ornithopters  wing propulsion  Flappingwing ornithopters  imitating birds or insects have been flown as microUAVs . Their inherent stealth recommends them for spy missions. Sub1g microUAVs inspired by flies albeit using a power tether have been able to land on vertical surfaces.  Other projects mimic the flight of beetles and other insects.  Computer control systems  A flight controller run on either CleanFlight or BaseFlight firmware for multirotor UAVs UAV computing capability followed the advances of computing technology beginning with analog controls and evolving into microcontrollers then systemonachip SOC and singleboard computers SBC. Modern system hardware for UAV control is often called the flight controller FC flight controller board FCB or autopilot. Common UAVsystems control hardware typically incorporate a primary microprocessor a secondary or failsafe processor and sensors such as accelerometers gyroscopes magnetometers and barometers into a single module. In 2024 EASA agreed on the first certification basis for a UAV flight controller in compliance with the ETSOC198 for Embentions autopilot. The certification of the UAV flight control systems aims to facilitate the integration of UAVs within the airspace and the operation of drones in critical areas.  Architecture  Sensors  Position and movement sensors give information about the aircraft state. Exteroceptive sensors deal with external information like distance measurements while exproprioceptive ones correlate internal and external states.  Noncooperative sensors are able to detect targets autonomously so they are used for separation assurance and collision avoidance.  Degrees of freedom DOF refers to both the amount and quality of sensors on board 6 DOF implies 3axis gyroscopes and accelerometers a typical inertial measurement unit   IMU 9 DOF refers to an IMU plus a compass 10 DOF adds a barometer and 11 DOF usually adds a GPS receiver.  In addition to the navigation sensors the UAV or UAS can be also equipped with monitoring devices such as RGB  multispectral  hyperspectral cameras or LiDAR  which may allow providing specific measurements or observations.  Actuators  UAV actuators include digital electronic speed controllers which control the RPM of the motors linked to motors engines and propellers  servomotors for planes and helicopters mostly weapons payload actuators LEDs and speakers. Software  This section needs to be updated . Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.  February 2022  The software running on a UAV is called the autopilot or the flight stack. The purpose of the flight stack is to fly the mission autonomously or with remotepilot input. An autopilot achieves this by obtaining data from sensors controlling the motors to make progress along a path and facilitate communications with ground control and mission planning.  UAVs are realtime systems that require highfrequency to changing sensor data. As a result UAVs rely on singleboard computers for their computational needs. Examples of such singleboard computers include Raspberry Pis  Beagleboards  etc. shielded with NavIO  PXFMini  etc. or designed from scratch such as NuttX  preemptive RT Linux  Xenomai  OrocosRobot Operating System or DDSROS 2.0 . Flight stack overview Layer Requirement Operations Example Firmware Timecritical From machine code to processor execution memory access ArduCopterv1 PX4 Middleware Timecritical Flight control navigation radio management PX4 Cleanflight ArduPilot Operating system Computerintensive Optical flow obstacle avoidance SLAM decisionmaking ROS Nuttx Linux distributions Microsoft IOT Due to the opensource nature of UAV software they can be customized to fit specific applications. For example researchers from the Technical University of Košice have replaced the default control algorithm of the PX4 autopilot.  This flexibility and collaborative effort has led to a large number of different opensource stacks some of which are forked from others such as CleanFlight which is forked from BaseFlight and from which three other stacks are forked. Loop principles  Typical flightcontrol loops for a multirotor UAVs employ openloop closedloop or hybrid control architectures. Open loop   This type provides a positive control signal faster slower left right up down without incorporating feedback from sensor data. Closed loop   This type incorporates sensor feedback to adjust behavior reduce speed to reflect tailwind move to altitude 300 feet. The PID controller is common. Sometimes feedforward is employed transferring the need to close the loop further.  Communications  UAVs use a radio for control and exchange of video and other data . Early UAVs had only narrowband uplink. Downlinks came later. These bidirectional narrowband radio links carried command and control CC and telemetry data about the status of aircraft systems to the remote operator. In most modern UAV applications video transmission is required. So instead of having separate links for CC telemetry and video traffic a broadband link is used to carry all types of data. These broadband links can leverage quality of service techniques and carry TCPIP traffic that can be routed over the internet. The radio signal from the operator side can be issued from either Ground control  a human operating a radio transmitter receiver a smartphone a tablet a computer or the original meaning of a military ground control station GCS . Remote network system such as satellite duplex data links for some military powers . Downstream digital video over mobile networks has also entered consumer markets while direct UAV control uplink over the cellular mesh and LTE have been demonstrated and are in trials.  Another aircraft serving as a relay or mobile control station   military mannedunmanned teaming MUMT.  Modern networking standards have explicitly considered drones and therefore include optimizations. The 5G standard has mandated reduced user plane latency to 1ms while using ultrareliable and lowlatency communications.  UAVtoUAV coordination supported by Remote ID communication technology. Remote ID messages containing the UAV coordinates are broadcast and can be used for collisionfree navigation.  Autonomy  Main article Autonomous aircraft UAVs degrees of autonomy The level of autonomy in UAVs varies widely. UAV manufacturers often build in specific autonomous operations such as  Selflevel attitude stabilization on the pitch and roll axes. Altitude hold The aircraft maintains its altitude using barometric pressure andor GPS data. Hoverposition hold Keep level pitch and roll stable yaw heading and altitude while maintaining position using GNSS or inertial sensors. Headless mode Pitch control relative to the position of the pilot rather than relative to the vehicles axes. Carefree automatic roll and yaw control while moving horizontally Takeoff and landing using a variety of aircraft or groundbased sensors and systems see also  autoland  Failsafe automatic landing or returntohome upon loss of control signal Returntohome Fly back to the point of takeoff often gaining altitude first to avoid possible intervening obstructions such as trees or buildings. Followme Maintain relative position to a moving pilot or other object using GNSS image recognition or homing beacon. GPS waypoint navigation Using GNSS to navigate to an intermediate location on a travel path. Orbit around an object Similar to Followme but continuously circle a target. Preprogrammed aerobatics such as rolls and loops Preprogrammed delivery  delivery drones One approach to quantifying autonomous capabilities is based on OODA terminology as suggested by a 2002 US Air Force Research Laboratory report and used in the table on the right.  A Northrop Grumman X47B unmanned combat aircraft demonstrator of the US Navy refuels in flight from a tanker aircraft. Full autonomy is available for specific tasks such as airborne refueling  or groundbased battery switching. Other functions available or under development include collective flight realtime collision avoidance  wall following corridor centring simultaneous localization and mapping and swarming  cognitive radio and machine learning . In this context computer vision can play an important role for automatically ensuring flight safety. Performance considerations  Flight envelope  UAVs can be programmed to perform aggressive maneuvers or landingperching on inclined surfaces  and then to climb toward better communication spots.  Some UAVs can control flight with varying flight modelisation   such as VTOL designs. UAVs can also implement perching on a flat vertical surface.  Endurance  UEL UAV741 Wankel engine for UAV operations Flight time against mass of small less than 1 kg drones  UAV endurance is not constrained by the physiological capabilities of a human pilot. Because of their small size low weight low vibration and high power to weight ratio Wankel rotary engines are used in many large UAVs. Their engine rotors cannot seize the engine is not susceptible to shockcooling during descent and it does not require an enriched fuel mixture for cooling at high power. These attributes reduce fuel usage increasing range or payload. Proper drone cooling is essential for longterm drone endurance. Overheating and subsequent engine failure is the most common cause of drone failure.  Hydrogen fuel cells  using hydrogen power may be able to extend the endurance of small UAVs up to several hours.   Micro air vehicles endurance is so far best achieved with flappingwing UAVs followed by planes and multirotors standing last due to lower Reynolds number .  Solarelectric UAVs a concept originally championed by the AstroFlight Sunrise in 1974 have achieved flight times of several weeks. Solarpowered atmospheric satellites atmosats designed for operating at altitudes exceeding 20 km 12 miles or 60000 feet for as long as five years could potentially perform duties more economically and with more versatility than low Earth orbit satellites. Likely applications include weather drones for weather monitoring  disaster recovery  Earth imaging and communications. Electric UAVs powered by microwave power transmission or laser power beaming are other potential endurance solutions.  Another application for a high endurance UAV would be to stare at a battlefield for a long interval ARGUSIS Gorgon Stare Integrated Sensor Is Structure to record events that could then be played backwards to track battlefield activities. Lengthy endurance flights UAV Flight time hoursminutes Date Notes Boeing Condor 5811 1989 The aircraft is currently in the Hiller Aviation Museum .  General Atomics Gnat 4000 1992   TAM5 3852 11 August 2003 Smallest UAV to cross the Atlantic  QinetiQ Zephyr Solar Electric 5400 September 2007   RQ4 Global Hawk 3306 22 March 2008 Set an endurance record for a fullscale operational uncrewed aircraft.  QinetiQ Zephyr Solar Electric 8237 2831 July 2008  QinetiQ Zephyr 7 33622 923 July 2010 Solar electric powered. Remained aloft for 14 days. Also filed for FAI altitude record of 70740 ft 21561 m  The delicacy of the British PHASA35 military drone at a late stage of development is such that traversing the first turbulent twelve miles of atmosphere is a hazardous endeavor. It has however remained on station at 65000 feet for 24 hours. Airbus Zephyr in 2023 has attained 70000 feet and flown for 64 days 200 days aimed at. This is sufficiently close enough to nearspace for them to be regarded in pseudosatellites as regards to their operational capabilities.  Reliability  Reliability improvements target all aspects of UAV systems using resilience engineering and fault tolerance techniques. Individual reliability covers robustness of flight controllers to ensure safety without excessive redundancy to minimize cost and weight.  Besides dynamic assessment of flight envelope allows damageresilient UAVs using nonlinear analysis with ad hoc designed loops or neural networks.  UAV software liability is bending toward the design and certifications of crewed avionics software .  Swarm resilience involves maintaining operational capabilities and reconfiguring tasks given unit failures.  Applications  Main article List of unmanned aerial vehicle applications In recent years autonomous drones have begun to transform various application areas as they can fly beyond visual line of sight BVLOS  while maximizing production reducing costs and risks ensuring site safety security and regulatory compliance  and protecting the human workforce in times of a pandemic.  They can also be used for consumerrelated missions like package delivery as demonstrated by Amazon Prime Air  and critical deliveries of health supplies. There are numerous civilian commercial military and aerospace applications for UAVs.  These include General Recreation  disaster relief  archeology  conservation of biodiversity and habitat   law enforcement  crime  and terrorism . Commercial Aerial surveillance  filmmaking   journalism  scientific research  surveying  cargo transport  mining  manufacturing  forestry  solar farming  thermal energy  ports and agriculture . Warfare  Main articles Unmanned combat aerial vehicle  Drone warfare  Loitering munition  Unmanned surveillance and reconnaissance aerial vehicle  Miniature UAV  Micro air vehicle  and Target drone A Baykar Bayraktar TB2 of the Ukrainian Air Force armed with MAML  two ground control stations in the background As of 2020 seventeen countries have armed UAVs and more than 100 countries use UAVs in a military capacity.  The first five countries producing domestic UAV designs are the United States China Israel Iran and Turkey.     Top military UAV manufactures are including General Atomics  Lockheed Martin  Northrop Grumman  Boeing  Baykar    TAI  IAIO  CASC and CAIG .  China has established and expanded its presence in military UAV market  since 2010. In the early 2020s Turkey also established and expanded its presence in the military UAV market.     In the early 2010s Israeli companies mainly focus on small surveillance UAV systems and by the number of drones Israel exported 60.7 2014 of UAVs on the market while the United States exported 23.9 2014.  Between 2010 and 2014 there were 439 drones exchanged compared to 322 in the five years previous to that among these only small fraction of overall trade  just 11 2.5 of the 439 are armed drones.  The US alone operated over 9000 military UAVs in 2014 among them more than 7000 are RQ11 Raven miniature UAVs .  Since 2010 Chinese drone companies have begun to export large quantities of drones to the global military market. Of the 18 countries that are known to have received military drones between 2010 and 2019 the top 12 all purchased their drones from China.   The shift accelerated in the 2020s due to Chinas advancement in drone technologies and manufacturing compounded by market demand from the Russian invasion of Ukraine and the IsraelGaza conflict .     For intelligence and reconnaissance missions the inherent stealth of micro UAV flappingwing ornithopters  imitating birds or insects offers potential for covert surveillance and makes them difficult targets to bring down. Unmanned surveillance and reconnaissance aerial vehicle are used for reconnaissance  attack  demining  and target practice . Following the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine a dramatic increase in UAV development took place with Ukraine creating the Brave1 platform to promote rapid development of innovative systems. Civil  Ziplines aircraft being launched from a base in Rwanda to deliver blood products The civilian commercial and general drone market is dominated by Chinese companies. Chinese manufacturer DJI alone had 74 of the civil market share in 2018 with no other company accounting for more than 5.  The companies continue to hold over 70 of global market share by 2023 despite under increasing scrutinies and sanctions from the United States.  The US Interior Department grounded its fleet of DJI drones in 2020 while the Justice Department prohibited the use of federal funds for the purchase of DJI and other foreignmade UAVs.   DJI is followed by American company 3D Robotics  Chinese company Yuneec  Autel Robotics  and French company Parrot .   As of May 2021 873576 UAVs had been registered with the US FAA  of which 42 were categorized as commercial and 58 as recreational.  2018 NPD point to consumers increasingly purchasing drones with more advanced features with 33 percent growth in both the 500 and 1000 market segments.  The civil UAV market is relatively new compared to the military one. Companies are emerging in both developed and developing nations at the same time. Many earlystage startups have received support and funding from investors as is the case in the United States and from government agencies as is the case in India.  Some universities offer research and training programs or degrees.  Private entities also provide online and inperson training programs for both recreational and commercial UAV use.  Consumer drones are widely used by police and military organizations worldwide because of the costeffective nature of consumer products. Since 2018 the Israeli military have used DJI UAVs for light reconnaissance missions.    DJI drones have been used by Chinese police in Xinjiang since 2017   and American police departments nationwide since 2018.   Both Ukraine and Russia used commercial DJI drones extensively during the Russian invasion of Ukraine .  These civilian DJI drones were sourced by governments hobbyists international donations to Ukraine and Russia to support each side on the battlefield and were often flown by drone hobbyists recruited by the armed forces. The prevalence of DJI drones was attributable to their market dominance affordability high performance and reliability.  Entertainment  See also Drone art and Drone racing Drones are also used in nighttime displays for artistic and advertising purposes with the main benefits are that they are safer quieter and better for the environment than fireworks. They can replace or be an adjunct for fireworks displays to reduce the financial burden of festivals. In addition they can complement fireworks due to the ability for drones to carry them creating new forms of artwork in the process.    Drones can also be used for racing either with or without VR functionality. Aerial photography  See also Drone journalism Drones are ideally suited to capturing aerial shots in photography and cinematography and are widely used for this purpose.  Small drones avoid the need for precise coordination between pilot and cameraman with the same person taking on both roles. Big drones with professional cine cameras usually have a drone pilot and a camera operator who controls camera angle and lens. For example the AERIGON cinema drone which is used in film production in big blockbuster movies is operated by 2 people.  Drones provide access to dangerous remote or otherwise inaccessible sites. Environmental monitoring  UASs or UAVs offer the great advantage for environmental monitoring to generate a new generation of survey at veryhigh or ultrahigh resolution both in space and time. This gives the opportunity to bridge the existing gap between satellite data and field monitoring. This has stimulated a huge number of activities in order to enhance the description of natural and agricultural ecosystems. Most common applications are Topographic surveys  for the production of orthomosaics digital surface models and 3D models Monitoring of natural ecosystems for biodiversity monitoring  habitat mapping  detection of invasive alien species  and study of ecosystem degradation due to invasive species or disturbances Precision agriculture  which exploits all available technologies including UAV in order to produce more with less e.g. optimisation of fertilizers pesticides irrigation River monitoring several methods have been developed to perform flow monitoring using image velocimetry methods which allow to properly describe the 2D flow velocity fields.  Structural integrity of any type of structure whether it be a dam railway or other dangerous inaccessible or massive locations for building monitoring.  These activities can be completed with different measurements such as photogrammetry  thermography multispectral images 3D field scanning and normalized difference vegetation index maps. Geological hazards  UAVs have become a widely used tool for studying geohazards such as landslides .  Various sensors including radar optical and thermal can be mounted on UAVs to monitor different properties. UAVs enable the capture of images of various landslide features such as transverse radial and longitudinal cracks ridges scarps and surfaces of rupture even in inaccessible areas of the sliding mass.   Moreover processing the optical images captured by UAVs also allows for the creation of point clouds and 3D models from which these properties can be derived.  Comparing point clouds obtained at different times allows for the detection of changes caused by landslide deformation.   Agriculture forestry and environmental studies  Main article Agricultural drone Agricultural drone on trailer setup As global demand for food production grows exponentially resources are depleted farmland is reduced and agricultural labor is increasingly in short supply there is an urgent need for more convenient and smarter agricultural solutions than traditional methods and the agricultural drone and robotics industry is expected to make progress.  Agricultural drones have been used to help build sustainable agriculture all over the world leading to a new generation of agriculture.  In this context there is a proliferation of innovations in both tools and methodologies which allow precise description of vegetation state and also may help to precisely distribute nutrients pesticides or seeds over a field.  The use of UAVs is also being investigated to help detect and fight wildfires whether through observation or launching pyrotechnic devices to start backfires .  UAVs are also now widely used to survey wildlife such as nesting seabirds seals and even wombat burrows.  Law enforcement  Main article Use of UAVs in law enforcement Police can use drones for applications such as search and rescue and traffic monitoring .  Humanitarian Aid  See also Delivery drone Drones are increasingly finding their application in humanitarian aid and disaster relief where they are used for a wide range of applications such as delivering food medicine and essential items to remote areas or image mapping before and following disasters  Safety and security  See also List of UAVrelated incidents and Unmanned combat aerial vehicle US Department of Agriculture poster warning about the risks of flying UAVs near wildfires Threats  Nuisance  UAVs can threaten airspace security in numerous ways including unintentional collisions or other interference with other aircraft deliberate attacks or by distracting pilots or flight controllers. The first incident of a droneairplane collision occurred in midOctober 2017 in Quebec City Canada.  The first recorded instance of a drone collision with a hot air balloon occurred on 10 August 2018 in Driggs Idaho  United States although there was no significant damage to the balloon nor any injuries to its 3 occupants the balloon pilot reported the incident to the National Transportation Safety Board  stating that I hope this incident helps create a conversation of respect for nature the airspace and rules and regulations.  Unauthorized UAV flights into or near major airports have prompted extended shutdowns of commercial flights.  Drones caused significant disruption at Gatwick Airport during December 2018  needing the deployment of the British Army.   In the United States flying close to a wildfire is punishable by a maximum 25000 fine. Nonetheless in 2014 and 2015 firefighting air support in California was hindered on several occasions including at the Lake Fire  and the North Fire .   In response California legislators introduced a bill that would allow firefighters to disable UAVs which invaded restricted airspace.  The FAA later required registration of most UAVs. Security vulnerabilities  By 2017 drones were being used to drop contraband into prisons.  The interest in UAVs cybersecurity has been raised greatly after the Predator UAV video stream hijacking incident in 2009  where Islamic militants used cheap offtheshelf equipment to stream video feeds from a UAV. Another risk is the possibility of hijacking or jamming a UAV in flight. Several security researchers have made public some vulnerabilities in commercial UAVs in some cases even providing full source code or tools to reproduce their attacks.  At a workshop on UAVs and privacy in October 2016 researchers from the Federal Trade Commission showed they were able to hack into three different consumer quadcopters and noted that UAV manufacturers can make their UAVs more secure by the basic security measures of encrypting the WiFi signal and adding password protection.  Aggression  Many UAVs have been loaded with dangerous payloads andor crashed into targets. Payloads have included or could include explosives chemical radiological or biological hazards. UAVs with generally nonlethal payloads could possibly be hacked and put to malicious purposes. CounterUAV systems CUAS from detection to electronic warfare to UAVs designed to destroy other UAVs are in development and being deployed by states to counter this threat. Such developments have occurred despite the difficulties. As J. Rogers stated in a 2017 interview to AT There is a big debate out there at the moment about what the best way is to counter these small UAVs whether they are used by hobbyists causing a bit of a nuisance or in a more sinister manner by a terrorist actor.  Countermeasures  Counter unmanned air system  Italian Army soldiers of the 17th Antiaircraft Artillery Regiment Sforzesca with a portable drone jammer in Rome Cannon antidrone system Further information Electronic warfare The malicious use of UAVs has led to the development of counter unmanned air system CUAS technologies. Automatic tracking and detection of UAVs from commercial cameras have become accurate thanks to the development of deep learning based machine learning algorithms.  It is also possible to automatically identify UAVs across different cameras with different view points and hardware specification with reidentification methods.  Commercial systems such as the Aaronia AARTOS have been installed on major international airports.   Once a UAV is detected it can be countered with kinetic force missiles projectiles or another UAV or by nonkinetic force laser microwaves communications jamming.  Antiaircraft missile systems such as the Iron Dome are also being enhanced with CUAS technologies. Utilising a smart UAV swarm to counter one or more hostile UAVs is also proposed.  Regulation  Main article Regulation of unmanned aerial vehicles Regulatory bodies around the world are developing unmanned aircraft system traffic management solutions to better integrate UAVs into airspace.  The use of unmanned aerial vehicles is becoming increasingly regulated by the civil aviation authorities of individual countries. Regulatory regimes can differ significantly according to drone size and use. The International Civil Aviation Organization ICAO began exploring the use of drone technology as far back as 2005 which resulted in a 2011 report.  France was among the first countries to set a national framework based on this report and larger aviation bodies such as the FAA and the EASA quickly followed suit.  In 2021 the FAA published a rule requiring all commercially used UAVs and all UAVs regardless of intent weighing 250 g or more to participate in Remote ID  which makes drone locations controller locations and other information public from takeoff to shutdown this rule has since been challenged in the pending federal lawsuit RaceDayQuads v. FAA .   EU Drone Certification  Class Identification Label  The implementation of the Class Identification Label serves a crucial purpose in the regulation and operation of drones.  The label is a verification mechanism designed to confirm that drones within a specific class meet the rigorous standards set by administrations for design and manufacturing.  These standards are necessary to ensure the safety and reliability of drones in various industries and applications. By providing this assurance to customers the Class Identification Label helps to increase confidence in drone technology and encourages wider adoption across industries. This in turn contributes to the growth and development of the drone industry and supports the integration of drones into society. Export controls  The export of UAVs or technology capable of carrying a 500 kg payload at least 300 km is restricted in many countries by the Missile Technology Control Regime . See also  List of unmanned aerial vehicles Delivery drone Drone in a Box Glide bomb International Aerial Robotics Competition List of films featuring drones List of military electronics of the United States MARSS Interceptor Micromechanical Flying Insect ParcAberporth Quadcopter Radiocontrolled aircraft Autonomous aircraft Optionally piloted vehicle Sypaq Corvo Precision Payload Delivery System Satellite Sentinel Project Tactical Control System UAV ground control station Unmanned underwater vehicle Portals  Aviation Systems science Engineering Telecommunication References  Citations   Tice Brian P. Spring 1991. Unmanned Aerial Vehicles  The Force Multiplier of the 1990s . Airpower Journal . Archived from the original on 24 July 2009 . Retrieved 6 June 2013 . When used UAVs should generally perform missions characterized by the three Ds dull dirty and dangerous.  a b Alvarado Ed 3 May 2021. 237 Ways Drone Applications Revolutionize Business . Drone Industry Insights . Archived from the original on 11 May 2021 . Retrieved 11 May 2021 .  F.  RekabiBana Hu J. T. Krajník Arvin F.  Unified Robust Path Planning and Optimal Trajectory Generation for Efficient 3D Area Coverage of Quadrotor UAVs  IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 2023.  a b Hu J. Niu H. Carrasco J. Lennox B. Arvin F.  Faulttolerant cooperative navigation of networked UAV swarms for forest fire monitoring  Aerospace Science and Technology 2022.  a b Remote sensing of the environment using unmanned aerial systems UAS . S.l. ELSEVIER  HEALTH SCIENCE. 2023. ISBN 9780323852838 . OCLC 1329422815 . Archived from the original on 27 February 2023 . Retrieved 11 January 2023 .  Perks Matthew T. Dal Sasso Silvano Fortunato Hauet Alexandre Jamieson Elizabeth Le Coz Jérôme Pearce Sophie PeñaHaro Salvador Pizarro Alonso Strelnikova Dariia Tauro Flavia Bomhof James Grimaldi Salvatore Goulet Alain Hortobágyi Borbála Jodeau Magali 8 July 2020. Towards harmonisation of image velocimetry techniques for river surface velocity observations . Earth System Science Data . 12 3 15451559. Bibcode  2020ESSD...12.1545P . doi  10.5194essd1215452020 . ISSN 18663516 . Archived from the original on 12 January 2023 . Retrieved 12 January 2023 .  Koparan Cengiz Koc A. Bulent Privette Charles V. Sawyer Calvin B. March 2020. Adaptive Water Sampling Device for Aerial Robots . Drones . 4 1 5. doi  10.3390drones4010005 . ISSN 2504446X .  Koparan Cengiz Koc Ali Bulent Privette Charles V. Sawyer Calvin B. Sharp Julia L. May 2018. Evaluation of a UAVAssisted Autonomous Water Sampling . Water . 10 5 655. doi  10.3390w10050655 .  Koparan Cengiz Koc Ali Bulent Privette Charles V. Sawyer Calvin B. March 2018. In Situ Water Quality Measurements Using an Unmanned Aerial Vehicle UAV System . Water . 10 3 264. doi  10.3390w10030264 .  Koparan Cengiz Koc Ali Bulent Privette Charles V. Sawyer Calvin B. March 2019. Autonomous In Situ Measurements of Noncontaminant Water Quality Indicators and Sample Collection with a UAV . Water . 11 3 604. doi  10.3390w11030604 .  Drones smuggling porn drugs to inmates around the world . Fox News . 17 April 2017. Archived from the original on 31 August 2018 . Retrieved 17 April 2017 .  Note the term  drone  refers to the male bee that serves only to fertilize the queen bee  hence the use of the name in reference to the DH Queen Bee aerial target.  Drones and Artificial Intelligence . Drone Industry Insights . 28 August 2018. Archived from the original on 17 September 2020 . Retrieved 11 April 2020 .  What is the difference between a drone and an RC plane or helicopter . Drones Etc. Archived from the original on 17 November 2015 . Retrieved 12 October 2015 .  unmanned aerial vehicle . TheFreeDictionary.com . Archived from the original on 8 January 2015 . Retrieved 8 January 2015 .  Guilmartin John F. unmanned aerial vehicle . Encyclopedia Britannica . Archived from the original on 29 March 2020 . Retrieved 24 March 2020 .  Unmanned Aircraft Systems Roadmap PDF . Archived from the original PDF on 2 October 2008.  European ATM Master Plan 2015  SESAR . www.sesarju.eu . Archived from the original on 6 February 2016 . Retrieved 3 February 2016 .  State government gears up for autonomous RPAS mapping . 23 January 2017. Archived from the original on 25 February 2017 . Retrieved 1 February 2017 .  Canadian Aviation Regulations . Government of Canada  Justice Laws Website . 1 June 2019. Archived from the original on 6 January 2022 . Retrieved 16 January 2019 .  a b c d UAV classification . Archived from the original on 23 May 2022 . Retrieved 10 June 2022 .  Eyes of the Army U.S. Army Roadmap for UAS 20102035 PDF . Archived PDF from the original on 18 February 2022 . Retrieved 10 June 2022 .  Nano micro small The different drone types in India  if Jammulike strike can be averted Archived 29 June 2021 at the Wayback Machine  ThePrint  29 June 2021.  Drones Percepto 3 January 2019. The Differences Between UAV UAS and Autonomous Drones . Percepto . Archived from the original on 18 February 2020 . Retrieved 18 February 2020 .  Cary Leslie Coyne James. ICAO Unmanned Aircraft Systems UAS Circular 328. 20112012 UAS Yearbook  UAS The Global Perspective PDF . Blyenburgh  Co. pp. 112115. Archived from the original PDF on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 26 February 2022 .  Hu J. Lanzon A. 2018. An innovative trirotor drone and associated distributed aerial drone swarm control . Robotics and Autonomous Systems . 103  162174. doi  10.1016j.robot.2018.02.019 .  Garrow Laurie A. German Brian J. Leonard Caroline E. 1 November 2021. Urban air mobility A comprehensive review and comparative analysis with autonomous and electric ground transportation for informing future research . Transportation Research Part C Emerging Technologies . 132  103377. Bibcode  2021TRPC..13203377G . doi  10.1016j.trc.2021.103377 . ISSN 0968090X .  Exploring Gas Powered Drones Uses and Benefits . www.flyability.com . Retrieved 8 August 2024 .  Zhang Caizhi Qiu Yuqi Chen Jiawei Li Yuehua Liu Zhitao Liu Yang Zhang Jiujun Hwa Chan Siew 1 August 2022. A comprehensive review of electrochemical hybrid power supply systems and intelligent energy managements for unmanned aerial vehicles in public services . Energy and AI . 9  100175. Bibcode  2022EneAI...900175Z . doi  10.1016j.egyai.2022.100175 . hdl  10356164036 . ISSN 26665468 .  jenks2026 30 January 2024. SolarPowered Drones and UAVs . Green.org . Retrieved 8 August 2024 .  cite web    CS1 maint numeric names authors list  link   Fabled Sky Research 2024. Revolutionizing UAV Capabilities Exploring the Potential of Nuclear Propulsion Systems . UAV Technologies  219399 Bytes. doi  10.6084M9.FIGSHARE.26198462.V1 .  Powering Solutions for Your Drone in 2024 New Fuels . www.commercialuavnews.com . Retrieved 8 August 2024 .  The Encyclopedia of the ArabIsraeli Conflict A Political Social and Military History A Political Social and Military History  ABCCLIO 12 May 2008 by Spencer C. Tucker Priscilla Mary Roberts pages 105455 ISBN  The Future of Drone Use Opportunities and Threats from Ethical and Legal Perspectives Archived 27 February 2023 at the Wayback Machine  Asser Press   Springer chapter by Alan McKenna page 355  Kaplan Philip 2013. Naval Aviation in the Second World War . Pen and Sword. p. 19. ISBN 9781473829978 . Archived from the original on 27 February 2023 . Retrieved 19 August 2019 .  Hallion Richard P. 2003. Taking Flight Inventing the Aerial Age from Antiquity through the First World War . Oxford University Press. p. 66 . ISBN 9780190289591 .  Naval Aviation in the First World War Its Impact and Influence  R. D. Layman page 56  Renner Stephen L. 2016. Broken Wings The Hungarian Air Force 191845 . Indiana University Press. p. 2. ISBN 9780253023391 . Archived from the original on 27 February 2023 . Retrieved 26 October 2019 .  Murphy Justin D. 2005. Military Aircraft Origins to 1918 An Illustrated History of Their Impact . ABCCLIO. pp. 910. ISBN 9781851094882 . Archived from the original on 27 February 2023 . Retrieved 19 August 2019 .  Haydon F. Stansbury 2000. Military Ballooning During the Early Civil War . JHU Press. pp. 18 20. ISBN 9780801864421 .  Mikesh Robert C. 1973. Japans World War II balloon bomb attacks on North America PDF . Smithsonian Annals of Flight 9. Washington DC 185. doi  10.5479si.AnnalsFlight.9 . hdl  1008818679 . ISSN 00810207 . Archived PDF from the original on 6 December 2017 . Retrieved 12 July 2018 .  Tapan K. Sarkar  History of wireless  John Wiley and Sons 2006 ISBN 0471718149  p. 97.  Biodiversity Heritage Library . Mécanique Appliquée.  Sur le télékine. Note de M. L. Torres présentée par M. Appell 3 August 1903 pp. 317319 Comptes rendus de lAcadémie des Sciences.  Randy Alfred  Nov. 7 1905 Remote Control Wows Public  Wired  7 November 2011.  H. R. Everett 2015. Unmanned Systems of World Wars I and II . MIT Press . pp. 9195. ISBN 9780262029223 .  a b c Taylor John W. R.. Janes Pocket Book of Remotely Piloted Vehicles .  Professor A. M. Low FLIGHT 3 October 1952 page 436 The First Guided Missile  Dempsey Martin E. 9 April 2010. Eyes of the ArmyU.S. Army Roadmap for Unmanned Aircraft Systems 20102035 PDF . U.S. Army . Archived from the original PDF on 22 September 2018 . Retrieved 6 March 2011 .  Says Robert Kanyike 21 May 2012. History of U.S. Drones . Archived from the original on 26 September 2019 . Retrieved 17 February 2014 .  Andersson Lennart 1994. Soviet Aircraft and Aviation 19171941 . The Putnam Aviation Series. Annapolis Maryland Naval Institute Press. p. 249. ISBN 9781557507709 . Archived from the original on 27 February 2023 . Retrieved 18 December 2021 . Experiments with a pilotless drone version of the TB1 controlled by radio from other aircraft started in 1935 and continued until 1939.  H. R. Everett 2015. Unmanned Systems of World Wars I and II . MIT Press . p. 318 . ISBN 9780262029223 .  Wagner 1982  p. xi.  Wagner 1982  p. xi xii.  Wagner 1982  p. xii.  Wagner 1982  p. 79.  Wagner 1982  p. 78 79.  Dunstan Simon 2013. Israeli Fortifications of the October War 1973 . Osprey Publishing. p. 16. ISBN 9781782004318 . Retrieved 25 October 2015 . The War of Attrition was also notable for the first use of UAVs or unmanned aerial vehicles carrying reconnaissance cameras in combat.  permanent dead link   Saxena V. K. 2013. The Amazing Growth and Journey of UAVs and Ballistic Missile Defence Capabilities Where the Technology is Leading to . Vij Books India Pvt Ltd. p. 6. ISBN 9789382573807 . Archived from the original on 27 February 2023 . Retrieved 25 October 2015 . During the Yom Kippur War the Israelis used Teledyne Ryan 124 R RPVs along with the homegrown Scout and Mastiff UAVs for reconnaissance surveillance and as decoys to draw fire from Arab SAMs. This resulted in Arab forces expending costly and scarce missiles on inappropriate targets ....  Blum Howard 2003. The eve of destruction the untold story of the Yom Kippur War . HarperCollins. ISBN 9780060013998 .  Wagner 1982  p. 202.  Wagner 1982  p. 200 212.  a b Wagner 1982  p. 208.  A Brief History of UAVs . Howstuffworks.com. 22 July 2008. Archived from the original on 22 May 2013 . Retrieved 8 January 2015 .  Russia Buys A Bunch of Israeli UAVs . Strategypage.com. Archived from the original on 26 October 2013 . Retrieved 8 January 2015 .  Azoulai Yuval 24 October 2011. Unmanned combat vehicles shaping future warfare . Globes . Archived from the original on 3 December 2013 . Retrieved 8 January 2015 .  Levinson Charles 13 January 2010. Israeli Robots Remake Battlefield . The Wall Street Journal . p. A10. Archived from the original on 13 March 2020 . Retrieved 13 January 2010 .  GalOr Benjamin 1990. Vectored Propulsion Supermaneuverability  Robot Aircraft . Springer Verlag. ISBN 9783540971610 .  Fuller Christopher J. 2015. The Eagle Comes Home to Roost The Historical Origins of the CIAs Lethal Drone Program . Intelligence and National Security . 30 6 769792. doi  10.108002684527.2014.895569 . S2CID 154927243 .  Z. Goraj A. Frydrychewicz R. Świtkiewicz B. Hernik J. Gadomski T. GoetzendorfGrabowski M. Figat St Suchodolski W. Chajec. report PDF . Bulletin of the Polish Academy of Sciences Technical Sciences Volume 52. Number 3 2004. Archived PDF from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 9 December 2015 .  Community Research and Development Information Service . Civil uav application and economic effectiveness of potential configuration solutions . published by the Publications Office of the European Union. Archived from the original on 29 January 2016 . Retrieved 9 December 2015 .  Ackerman Spencer Shachtman Noah 9 January 2012. Almost 1 in 3 U.S. Warplanes Is a Robot . WIRED . Archived from the original on 23 March 2020 . Retrieved 8 January 2015 .  a b Singer Peter W. A Revolution Once More Unmanned Systems and the Middle East Archived 6 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine  The Brookings Institution Archived 26 January 2018 at the Wayback Machine  November 2009.  Radsan AJ Murphy 2011. Measure Twice Shoot Once Higher Care for CiaTargeted Killing. Univ. Ill. Law Rev.12011241 .  Sayler 2015  Franke Ulrike Esther The global diffusion of unmanned aerial vehicles UAVs or drones in Mike Aaronson ed Precision Strike Warfare and International Intervention Routledge 2015.  Hambling David. Drones may have attacked humans fully autonomously for the first time . New Scientist . Archived from the original on 30 July 2021 . Retrieved 30 May 2021 .  Killer drone hunted down a human target without being told to . New York Post . 29 May 2021. Archived from the original on 30 July 2021 . Retrieved 30 May 2021 .  ForestierWalker Robin 13 October 2020. NagornoKarabakh New weapons for an old conflict spell danger . Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 13 October 2020 . Retrieved 18 December 2021 . ... battlefield videos and the known military capabilities of the two warring sides suggest Azerbaijan has the technological advantage especially with its combat drones purchased from Israel and Turkey.  BailonRuiz Rafael Lacroix Simon BitMonnot Arthur October 2018. Planning to Monitor Wildfires with a Fleet of UAVs . 2018 IEEERSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems IROS . Madrid IEEE. pp. 47294734. doi  10.1109IROS.2018.8593859 . ISBN 9781538680940 . S2CID 52970107 . Archived from the original on 29 December 2022 . Retrieved 11 January 2023 .  Hill John 7 May 2024. In data UAS market projected to nearly double in ten years . Army Technology . Retrieved 8 May 2024 .  Design Simulation and New Applications of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles . www.mdpi.com . Retrieved 24 March 2023 .  Nagel Huub Bondt Geert Custers Bart Vergouw Bas 16 July 2016. Drone Technology Types Payloads Applications Frequency Spectrum Issues and Future Developments . The Future of Drone Use .  da Silva F.B Scott S.D Cummings M.L December 2007. Design Methodology for Unmannded Aerial Vehicle UAV Team Coordination PDF . Design Methodology for Unmannded Aerial Vehicle UAV Team Coordination .  TorresSánchez Jorge LópezGranados Francisca Castro Ana Isabel De PeñaBarragán José Manuel 6 March 2013. Configuration and Specifications of an Unmanned Aerial Vehicle UAV for Early Site Specific Weed Management . PLOS ONE . 8 3 e58210. Bibcode  2013PLoSO...858210T . doi  10.1371journal.pone.0058210 . ISSN 19326203 . PMC 3590160 . PMID 23483997 .  TorresSánchez Jorge LópezGranados Francisca De Castro Ana Isabel PeñaBarragán José Manuel 2013. Configuration and specifications of an Unmanned Aerial Vehicle UAV for early site specific weed management . PLOS ONE . 8 3 e58210. Bibcode  2013PLoSO...858210T . doi  10.1371journal.pone.0058210 . ISSN 19326203 . PMC 3590160 . PMID 23483997 .  Model airplane historymaker Maynard Hill dies at the age of 85 . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on 4 July 2018 . Retrieved 17 May 2018 .  Chirarattananon Pakpong Ma Kevin Y Wood J 22 May 2014 Adaptive control of a millimeterscale flappingwing robot PDF  Bioinspiration  Biomimetics  9 2 025004 Bibcode  2014BiBi....9b5004C  CiteSeerX 10.1.1.650.3728  doi  10.10881748318292025004  PMID 24855052  S2CID 12799012  archived from the original PDF on 16 April 2016  Sarah Knapton 29 March 2016. Giant remotecontrolled beetles and biobot insects could replace drones . The Telegraph . Archived from the original on 1 April 2016.  Antonio 11 July 2024. EASA Approves ETSO Certification Basis for Veronte Autopilot . Embention . Retrieved 2 August 2024 .  a b c Floreano Dario Wood Robert J. 27 May 2015. Science technology and the future of small autonomous drones . Nature . 521 7553 460466. Bibcode  2015Natur.521..460F . doi  10.1038nature14542 . PMID 26017445 . S2CID 4463263 . Archived from the original on 26 October 2019 . Retrieved 26 October 2019 .  Fasano Giancarmine Accardo Domenico Tirri Anna Elena Moccia Antonio De Lellis Ettore 1 October 2015. Radarelectrooptical data fusion for noncooperative UAS sense and avoid . Aerospace Science and Technology . 46  436450. Bibcode  2015AeST...46..436F . doi  10.1016j.ast.2015.08.010 .  Arduino Playground  WhatIsDegreesOfFreedom6DOF9DOF10DOF11DOF . playground.arduino.cc . Archived from the original on 18 February 2016 . Retrieved 4 February 2016 .  Manfreda Salvatore McCabe Matthew Miller Pauline Lucas Richard Pajuelo Madrigal Victor Mallinis Giorgos Ben Dor Eyal Helman David Estes Lyndon Ciraolo Giuseppe Müllerová Jana Tauro Flavia de Lima M. de Lima João Maltese Antonino 20 April 2018. On the Use of Unmanned Aerial Systems for Environmental Monitoring . Remote Sensing . 10 4 641. Bibcode  2018RemS...10..641M . doi  10.3390rs10040641 . hdl  10251127481 . ISSN 20724292 .  Carlson Daniel F. Rysgaard Søren 1 January 2018. Adapting opensource drone autopilots for realtime iceberg observations . MethodsX . 5  10591072. doi  10.1016j.mex.2018.09.003 . ISSN 22150161 . PMC 6139390 . PMID 30225206 .  Lesko J. Schreiner M. Megyesi D. Kovacs Levente November 2019. Pixhawk PX4 Autopilot in Control of a Small Unmanned Airplane . 2019 Modern Safety Technologies in Transportation MOSATT . Kosice Slovakia IEEE. pp. 9093. doi  10.1109MOSATT48908.2019.8944101 . ISBN 9781728150833 . S2CID 209695691 . Archived from the original on 27 February 2023 . Retrieved 8 October 2020 .  PierreJean Bristeau François Callou David Vissière Nicolas Petit 2011. The Navigation and Control technology inside the AR.Drone micro UAV PDF . IFAC World Congress . Archived PDF from the original on 27 February 2023 . Retrieved 4 February 2016 .  Cellular enables safer drone deployments . Qualcomm . Archived from the original on 9 May 2018 . Retrieved 9 May 2018 .  Identifying Critical MannedUnmanned Teaming Skills for Unmanned Aircraft System Operators PDF . U.S. Army Research Institute for the Behavioral and Social Sciences . September 2012. Archived PDF from the original on 6 February 2016.  Minimum requirements related to technical performance for IMT2020 radio interfaces . www.itu.int . Archived from the original on 6 August 2020 . Retrieved 8 October 2020 .  Vinogradov Evgenii Kumar A. V. S. Sai Bhargav Minucci Franco Pollin Sofie Natalizio Enrico 2023. Remote ID for separation provision and multiagent navigation. 2023 IEEEAIAA 42nd Digital Avionics Systems Conference DASC . pp. 110. arXiv  2309.00843 . doi  10.1109DASC58513.2023.10311133 . ISBN 9798350333572 .  Automated Vehicles for Safety  NHTSA . www.nhtsa.gov . Archived from the original on 7 October 2021 . Retrieved 8 October 2021 .  Clough Bruce August 2002. Metrics Schmetrics How The Heck Do You Determine A UAVs Autonomy Anyway . US Air Force Research Laboratory . Archived from the original on 24 September 2020.  Davenport Christian 23 April 2015. Watch a step in Navy history an autonomous drone gets refueled midair . The Washington Post . ISSN 01908286 . Archived from the original on 20 January 2016 . Retrieved 3 February 2016 .  Teaching tiny drones how to fly themselves . Ars Technica . 27 November 2012. Archived from the original on 5 February 2016 . Retrieved 4 February 2016 .  Biomimetics and Dextrous Manipulation Lab  MultiModalRobots . bdml.stanford.edu . Archived from the original on 23 March 2016 . Retrieved 21 March 2016 .  DAndrea Raffaello 11 June 2013. The astounding athletic power of quadcopters . www.ted.com . Archived from the original on 5 February 2016 . Retrieved 4 February 2016 .  Yanguo Song Huanjin Wang 1 June 2009. Design of Flight Control System for a Small Unmanned Tilt Rotor Aircraft . Chinese Journal of Aeronautics . 22 3 250256. Bibcode  2009ChJAn..22..250Y . doi  10.1016S1000936108600953 .  The device designed for landing UAV helicopter type on a flat vertical surface . patents.google.com . Archived from the original on 7 March 2017 . Retrieved 6 November 2016 .  The Importance of Proper Cooling and Airflow for Optimal Drone Performance . Pelonis Technologies . Archived from the original on 22 June 2018 . Retrieved 22 June 2018 .  Flying on Hydrogen Georgia Tech Researchers Use Fuel Cells to Power Unmanned Aerial Vehicle  Georgia Tech Research Institute . www.gtri.gatech.edu . Archived from the original on 3 February 2016 . Retrieved 4 February 2016 .  Hydrogenpowered Hycopter quadcopter could fly for 4 hours at a time . www.gizmag.com . 20 May 2015. Archived from the original on 4 February 2016 . Retrieved 4 February 2016 .  Gibbs Yvonne 31 March 2015. NASA Armstrong Fact Sheet Beamed Laser Power for UAVs . NASA . Archived from the original on 5 April 2019 . Retrieved 22 June 2018 .  Vertical Challenge Monsters of the sky PDF  archived from the original PDF on 11 September 2013  General Atomics Gnat . Designationsystems.net. Archived from the original on 11 December 2008 . Retrieved 8 January 2015 .  UAV Notes . Archived from the original on 30 July 2013.  Trans atlantic Model . Tam.plannet21.com. Archived from the original on 22 May 2016 . Retrieved 8 January 2015 .  QinetiQs Zephyr UAV exceeds official world record for longest duration unmanned flight Press release. QinetiQ. 10 September 2007. Archived from the original on 23 April 2011.  Simonite Tom. New Scientist Technology Blog Solar plane en route to everlasting flight . New Scientist . Archived from the original on 2 April 2015 . Retrieved 8 January 2015 .  Northrop Grummans Global Hawk Unmanned Aircraft Sets 33Hour Flight Endurance Record . Spacewar.com. Archived from the original on 1 July 2013 . Retrieved 27 August 2013 .  QinetiQs Zephyr UAV flies for three and a half days to set unofficial world record for longest duration unmanned flight Press release. QinetiQ. 24 August 2008. Archived from the original on 24 May 2011.  QinetiQ files for three world records for its Zephyr Solar powered UAV . QinetiQ Press release. 24 August 2010. Archived from the original on 24 September 2010.  MacDonald Alistair 14 July 2023. Drones Reach Stratospheric Heights in Race to Fly Higher Longer . Wall Street Journal  via www.wsj.com.  Boniol December 2014. Towards Modular and Certified Avionics for UAV PDF . Aerospacelab Journal . Archived PDF from the original on 4 February 2016 . Retrieved 4 February 2016 .  D. Boskovic and Knoebel 2009. A Comparison Study of Several Adaptive Control Strategies for Resilient Flight Control PDF . AIAA Guidance Navigation andControl Conference . Archived from the original PDF on 4 February 2016.  Atkins. Certifiable Autonomous Flight Management for Unmanned Aircraft Systems . University of Michigan . Archived from the original on 5 March 2017 . Retrieved 4 February 2016 .  Subhav Pradhan William Otte Abhishek Dubey Aniruddha Gokhale Gabor Karsai 2013. Key Considerations for a Resilient and Autonomous Deployment and Configuration Infrastructure for CyberPhysical Systems PDF . Dept. of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Vanderbilt University Nashville . Archived PDF from the original on 4 February 2016 . Retrieved 4 February 2016 .  How Autonomous Drone Flights Will Go Beyond Line of Sight . Nanalyze . 31 December 2019. Archived from the original on 20 May 2020 . Retrieved 16 April 2020 .  McNabb Miriam 28 February 2020. Drones Get the Lights Back on Faster for Florida Communities . DRONELIFE . Archived from the original on 12 March 2020 . Retrieved 16 April 2020 .  Peck Abe 19 March 2020. Coronavirus Spurs Perceptos DroneinaBox Surveillance Solution . Inside Unmanned Systems . Archived from the original on 24 March 2020 . Retrieved 16 April 2020 .  Valle Roberto G. January 2022. Rapid drone semiautomated counts of wintering Greater Flamingos  Phoenicopterus roseus  as a tool for amateur researchers . Ibis . 164 1 320328. doi  10.1111ibi.12993 . ISSN 00191019 . S2CID 237865267 . Archived from the original on 13 October 2022 . Retrieved 13 October 2022 .  a b Mademlis Ioannis Nikolaidis Nikos Tefas Anastasios Pitas Ioannis Wagner Tilman Messina Alberto 2019. Autonomous UAV Cinematography A Tutorial and a Formalized ShotType Taxonomy . ACM Computing Surveys . 52 5. Association for Computing Machinery. doi  10.11453347713 . S2CID 202676119 . Archived from the original on 3 November 2022 . Retrieved 3 November 2022 .  Horowitz Michael C. 2020. Do Emerging Military Technologies Matter for International Politics . Annual Review of Political Science . 23 1 385400. doi  10.1146annurevpolisci050718032725 .  a b Strengthening Turkish Policy on Drone Exports . Carnegie Endowment for International. Archived from the original on 23 March 2022 . Retrieved 17 March 2022 .  a b c Turkeys defense industry targets more than 4 billion in exports this year Official . Hürriyet Daily News. 6 March 2022. Archived from the original on 17 March 2022 . Retrieved 17 March 2022 .  Combat drones in China are coming to a conflict near you . www.intelligentaerospace.com . 19 March 2021. Archived from the original on 7 June 2021 . Retrieved 7 June 2021 .  a b c d e Market for Military Drones will Surge . 27 October 2016. Archived from the original on 19 February 2018 . Retrieved 19 February 2018 .  a b Turkish defence industry grows as Akinci UCAV signs first export deal . TRTWORLD. 23 January 2022. Archived from the original on 30 January 2022 . Retrieved 17 March 2022 .  a b Arnett George 16 March 2015. The numbers behind the worldwide trade in UAVs . The Guardian . Archived from the original on 19 December 2016 . Retrieved 13 December 2016 .  Pentagon Plans for Cuts to Drone Budgets . DoD Buzz . 2 January 2014. Archived from the original on 8 January 2015 . Retrieved 17 March 2022 .  Is China at the Forefront of Drone Technology . Center for Strategic and Internation Studies . 29 May 2018.  Seong Hyeon Choi 25 November 2023. Drone tech gives China an edge in Middle East arms sales but IsraelGaza war brings risks analysts . South China Morning Post .  a b Somerville Heather 9 November 2023. Chinese AmericanIt Doesnt Matter. Israel Wants Inexpensive Drones . The Wall Street Journal .  Skove Sam 1 May 2024. UK eyes Chinese drone parts for Ukraine . Defense One .  Joe Rick 5 February 2020. Chinas Military Advancements in the 2010s Air and Ground . The Diplomat .  Bateman Joshua 1 September 2017. China drone maker DJI Alone atop the unmanned skies . News Ledge . Archived from the original on 19 February 2018 . Retrieved 19 February 2018 .  Anwar Nessa 7 February 2023. Worlds largest drone maker is unfazed  even if its blacklisted by the U.S. CNBC .  Friedman Lisa McCabe David 29 January 2020. Interior Dept. Grounds Its Drones Over Chinese Spying Fears . The New York Times . ISSN 03624331 . Archived from the original on 29 January 2020 . Retrieved 17 November 2020 .  Miller Maggie 8 October 2020. DOJ bans use of grant funds for certain foreignmade drones . The Hill . Archived from the original on 28 November 2020 . Retrieved 17 November 2020 .  DJI market share heres exactly how rapidly it has grown in just a few years . Emberify Blog . 18 September 2018. Archived from the original on 24 September 2018 . Retrieved 18 September 2018 .  Daly David 2021. 5 Major Drone Manufacturers Powering the Industry . Consortiq .  UAS by the Numbers . www.faa.gov . Archived from the original on 17 May 2021 . Retrieved 24 May 2021 .  Consumer Drones By the Numbers in 2018 and Beyond  News Ledge . News Ledge . 4 April 2017. Archived from the original on 14 October 2018 . Retrieved 13 October 2018 .  Skylark Drones set to raise its first round of funding to boost expansion . 14 September 2015. Archived from the original on 14 September 2016 . Retrieved 28 August 2016 .  Peterson Andrea 19 August 2013. States are competing to be the Silicon Valley of drones . The Washington Post . ISSN 01908286 . Archived from the original on 13 February 2016 . Retrieved 4 February 2016 .  Drone Training Courses  The Complete List . Drone Business Marketer . Archived from the original on 16 November 2016 . Retrieved 1 December 2016 .  IDF buying massmarket DJI drones . Janes 360 . Archived from the original on 11 December 2017.  Greenwood Faine 16 August 2017. The U.S. Military Shouldnt Use Commercial Drones . Slate . ISSN 10912339 . Archived from the original on 17 April 2018 . Retrieved 2 June 2023 .  DJI Won the Drone Wars and Now Its Paying the Price . Bloomberg . 26 March 2020. Archived from the original on 19 November 2020 . Retrieved 18 November 2020 .  大疆创新与新疆自治区公安厅结为警用无人机战略合作伙伴 . YouUAV.com . 24 December 2017. Archived from the original on 18 December 2020 . Retrieved 18 November 2020 .  The Next Frontier of Police Surveillance Is Drones . Slate . 7 June 2018. Archived from the original on 11 December 2019 . Retrieved 10 December 2019 .  These Police Drones are Watching You . Project On Government Oversight . 25 September 2018. Archived from the original on 11 December 2019 . Retrieved 10 December 2019 .  Sangma Mike 25 December 2022. Ukraine has an unlikely ally in fight against Russia DJI drones . East Mojo . Archived from the original on 20 February 2023 . Retrieved 26 December 2022 .  Greenwood Faine 16 February 2023. The Drone War in Ukraine Is Cheap Deadly and Made in China . Archived from the original on 26 September 2023 . Retrieved 6 March 2023 .  Drone Light Shows Powered by Intel . Intel . Archived from the original on 23 June 2021 . Retrieved 28 June 2021 .  Hirsch Lauren 1 July 2023. Fireworks Have a New Competitor Drones . The New York Times . Retrieved 10 August 2023 .  Fireworks and Drones Combine to Create Amazing Long Exposure Images . Moss and Fog . 1 May 2023 . Retrieved 10 August 2023 .  AERIGON cinema drone UAV pioneering in film production . Archived from the original on 26 August 2021 . Retrieved 26 August 2021 .  Ferreira Edgar Chandler Jim Wackrow Rene Shiono Koji April 2017. Automated extraction of free surface topography using SfMMVS photogrammetry . Flow Measurement and Instrumentation . 54  243249. Bibcode  2017FloMI..54..243F . doi  10.1016j.flowmeasinst.2017.02.001 . S2CID 56307390 .  Reddy C. Sudhakar Kurian Ayushi Srivastava Gaurav Singhal Jayant Varghese A. O. Padalia Hitendra Ayyappan N. Rajashekar G. Jha C. S. Rao P. V. N. January 2021. Remote sensing enabled essential biodiversity variables for biodiversity assessment and monitoring technological advancement and potentials . Biodiversity and Conservation . 30 1 114. Bibcode  2021BiCon..30....1R . doi  10.1007s10531020020738 . ISSN 09603115 . S2CID 254281346 . Archived from the original on 27 February 2023 . Retrieved 12 January 2023 .  Gonçalves João Henriques Renato Alves Paulo SousaSilva Rita Monteiro António T. Lomba Ângela Marcos Bruno Honrado João January 2016. Rocchini Duccio ed.. Evaluating an unmanned aerial vehiclebased approach for assessing habitat extent and condition in finescale early successional mountain mosaics . Applied Vegetation Science . 19 1 132146. Bibcode  2016AppVS..19..132G . doi  10.1111avsc.12204 . Archived from the original on 12 January 2023 . Retrieved 12 January 2023 .  Barbizan Sühs R. Ziller S. R. Dechoum M. 2023. Is the use of drones costeffective and efficient in detecting invasive alien trees A case study from a subtropical coastal ecosystem. Biological Invasions . 26 2 357363. doi  10.1007s10530023031905 . S2CID 265016887 .  Zhang Chunhua Kovacs John M. December 2012. The application of small unmanned aerial systems for precision agriculture a review . Precision Agriculture . 13 6 693712. Bibcode  2012PrAgr..13..693Z . doi  10.1007s1111901292745 . ISSN 13852256 . S2CID 254938502 . Archived from the original on 27 February 2023 . Retrieved 12 January 2023 .  Perks Matthew T. Russell Andrew J. Large Andrew R. G. 5 October 2016. Technical Note Advances in flash flood monitoring using unmanned aerial vehicles UAVs . Hydrology and Earth System Sciences . 20 10 40054015. Bibcode  2016HESS...20.4005P . doi  10.5194hess2040052016 . ISSN 16077938 . Archived from the original on 12 January 2023 . Retrieved 12 January 2023 .  Zhou Jianguo He Linshu Luo Haitao 19 March 2023. RealTime Positioning Method for UAVs in Complex Structural Health Monitoring Scenarios . Drones . 7 3 212. doi  10.3390drones7030212 . ISSN 2504446X .  Sun Jianwei Yuan Guoqin Song Laiyun Zhang Hongwen January 2024. Unmanned Aerial Vehicles UAVs in Landslide Investigation and Monitoring A Review . Drones . 8 1 30. doi  10.3390drones8010030 . ISSN 2504446X .  Dai Keren Li Zhiyu Xu Qiang Tomas Roberto Li Tao Jiang Liming Zhang Jianyong Yin Tao Wang Hao 1 July 2023. Identification and evaluation of the high mountain upper slope potential landslide based on multisource remote sensing the Aniangzhai landslide case study . Landslides . 20 7 14051417. Bibcode  2023Lands..20.1405D . doi  10.1007s10346023020444 . ISSN 16125118 .  Yang Yuchuan Wang Xiaobo Jin Wei Cao Jiayun Cheng Baogen MaosenXiong Zhou Shunwen ChaoZhang 1 October 2019. Characteristics analysis of the reservoir landslides base on unmanned aerial vehicle UAV scanning technology at the Maoergai Hydropower Station Southwest China . IOP Conference Series Earth and Environmental Science . 349 1 012009. Bibcode  2019EES..349a2009Y . doi  10.1088175513153491012009 . ISSN 17551307 .  Tomás Roberto Pinheiro Marisa Pinto Pedro Pereira Eduardo Miranda Tiago 31 May 2023. Preliminary analysis of the mechanisms characteristics and causes of a recent catastrophic structurally controlled rock planar slide in Esposende northern Portugal . Landslides . 20 8 16571665. Bibcode  2023Lands..20.1657T . doi  10.1007s1034602302082y . ISSN 1612510X .  Zhou Jiawen Jiang Nan Li Congjiang Li Haibo 9 February 2024. A landslide monitoring method using data from unmanned aerial vehicle and terrestrial laser scanning with insufficient and inaccurate ground control points . Journal of Rock Mechanics and Geotechnical Engineering . 16 10 41254140. doi  10.1016j.jrmge.2023.12.004 . ISSN 16747755 .  Peterman V. 26 August 2015. Landslide Activity Monitoring with the Help of Unmanned Aerial Vehicle . The International Archives of the Photogrammetry Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences . XL1W4 215218. Bibcode  2015ISPAr.XL1..215P . doi  10.5194isprsarchivesXL1W42152015 . ISSN 16821750 .  Global Agriculture Drones and Robots Market Analysis  Forecast 20182028  ResearchAndMarkets.com . finance.yahoo.com . Archived from the original on 7 July 2019 . Retrieved 23 May 2019 .  Africa Farming Problems Aided With Drone Technology . Drone Addicts . 12 March 2018. Archived from the original on 29 June 2018 . Retrieved 23 May 2019 .  Drones That Launch Flaming Balls Are Being Tested To Help Fight Wildfires . NPR.org . Archived from the original on 25 April 2018 . Retrieved 5 April 2018 .  Old JM Lin S H Franklin MJM 2019. Mapping out barenosed wombat  Vombatus ursinus  burrows with the use of a drone. BMC Ecology. 1939. DOI 10.1186s1289801902575  Faust Daniel R. 2015. Police Drones 1 ed.. New York The Rosen Publishing Group Inc. ISBN 9781508145028 . Archived from the original on 27 February 2023 . Retrieved 20 February 2020 .  Sindi  Zarei 15 September 2023. Drones in humanitarian aid  Can they be a gamechanger .  Dent Steve 16 October 2017. Drone hits a commercial plane for the first time in Canada . Engadget. Archived from the original on 16 October 2017 . Retrieved 16 October 2017 .  Tellman Julie 28 September 2018. Firstever recorded dronehot air balloon collision prompts safety conversation . Teton Valley News . Boise Idaho United States Boise PostRegister. Archived from the original on 3 October 2018 . Retrieved 3 October 2018 .  Drones need to be encouraged and people protected . The Economist . 26 January 2019. ProQuest 2171135630 . Archived from the original on 27 June 2020 . Retrieved 28 June 2020 .  Halon Eytan 21 December 2018. Israeli antidrone technology brings an end to Gatwick Airport chaos  International news  Jerusalem Post . jpost.com . Archived from the original on 22 December 2018 . Retrieved 22 December 2018 .  Matthew Weaver Damien Gayle Patrick Greenfield Frances Perraudin 20 December 2018. Military called in to help with Gatwick drone crisis . The Guardian . Archived from the original on 22 December 2018 . Retrieved 22 December 2018 .  In The Heat of the Moment Drones Are Getting in the Way of Firefighters . NPR.org . Archived from the original on 5 March 2018 . Retrieved 5 April 2018 .  Michael Martinez Paul Vercammen Ben Brumfield 18 July 2015. Drones visit California wildfire angering firefighters . CNN . Archived from the original on 8 November 2016 . Retrieved 22 August 2016 .  Medina Jennifer 19 July 2015. Chasing Video With Drones Hobbyists Imperil California Firefighting Efforts . The New York Times . Archived from the original on 21 July 2015  via NYTimes.com.  Rocha Veronica 21 July 2015. Attack on the drones Legislation could allow California firefighters to take them down . Archived from the original on 28 August 2016 . Retrieved 22 August 2016  via LA Times.  Prisons Work To Keep Out DrugSmuggling Drones . NPR.org . Archived from the original on 19 January 2018 . Retrieved 19 January 2018 .  Mike Mount Elaine Quijano. Iraqi insurgents hacked Predator drone feeds U.S. official indicates . CNN.com . Archived from the original on 5 March 2017 . Retrieved 6 December 2016 .  Walters Sander 29 October 2016. How Can Drones Be Hacked The updated list of vulnerable drones  attack tools . Medium . Archived from the original on 23 July 2018 . Retrieved 6 December 2016 .  Glaser April 4 January 2017. The U.S. government showed just how easy it is to hack drones made by Parrot DBPower and Cheerson . Recode . Archived from the original on 5 January 2017 . Retrieved 6 January 2017 .  Antidrone technology to be test flown on UK base amid terror fears . 6 March 2017. Archived from the original on 7 May 2017 . Retrieved 9 May 2017 .  IsaacMedina Brian K. S. Poyser Matthew Organisciak Daniel Willcocks Chris G. Breckon Toby P. Shum Hubert P. H. 2021. Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Visual Detection and Tracking using Deep Neural Networks A Performance Benchmark . pp. 12231232. arXiv  2103.13933 .  Organisciak Daniel Poyser Matthew Alsehaim Aishah Hu Shanfeng IsaacMedina Brian K. S. Breckon Toby P. Shum Hubert P. H. 2022. UAVReID A Benchmark on Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Reidentification in Video Imagery. Proceedings of the 17th International Joint Conference on Computer Vision Imaging and Computer Graphics Theory and Applications . SciTePress. pp. 136146. arXiv  2104.06219 . doi  10.52200010836600003124 . ISBN 9789897585555 .  Heathrow picks CUAS to combat drone disruption . Archived from the original on 9 November 2019 . Retrieved 13 March 2019 .  Muscat International Airport to install USD10 million Aaronia counterUAS system . 21 January 2019. Archived from the original on 9 November 2019 . Retrieved 21 January 2019 .  GrandClément Sarah Bajon Theò 19 October 2022. Uncrewed Aerial Systems A Primer . United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research . Archived from the original on 5 January 2023 . Retrieved 5 January 2023 .  cite journal    CS1 maint bot original URL status unknown  link   Hartley John Shum Hubert P. H. Ho Edmond S. L. Wang He Ramamoorthy Subramanian 2022. Formation Control for UAVs Using a Flux Guided Approach. Expert Systems with Applications . 205 . Elsevier 117665. arXiv  2103.09184 . doi  10.1016j.eswa.2022.117665 . ISSN 09574174 . S2CID 232240581 .  What is unmanned traffic management . Airbus . Archived from the original on 8 February 2021 . Retrieved 28 January 2021 .  Cary Leslie Coyne James. ICAO Unmanned Aircraft Systems UAS Circular 328. 20112012 UAS Yearbook  UAS The Global Perspective PDF . Blyenburgh  Co. pp. 112115. Archived from the original PDF on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 26 February 2022 .  Boedecker Hendrik. The 2021 Drone Regulation  What is new What is planned . Drone Industry Insights . Archived from the original on 17 May 2021 . Retrieved 17 May 2021 .  UAS Remote Identification Overview . www.faa.gov . Archived from the original on 27 May 2021 . Retrieved 29 May 2021 .  FAA Legal Battle  Challenging Remote ID . RaceDayQuads . Archived from the original on 27 May 2021 . Retrieved 29 May 2021 .  UAS Class Label . www.eudronport.com . August 2022. Archived from the original on 5 October 2022 . Retrieved 21 February 2023 .  Official Journal of the European Union . www.eurlex.europa.eu . Archived from the original on 1 November 2020 . Retrieved 20 February 2023 . Bibliography  Axe David. Drone War Vietnam. Pen  Sword Military. Great Britain. 2021. ISBN 978 1 52677 026 4 Sayler Kelley June 2015. A world of proliferated drones a technology primer PDF . Center for a New American Security . Archived from the original PDF on 6 March 2016. Wagner William 1982 Lightning Bugs and other Reconnaissance Drones The cando story of Ryans unmanned spy planes  Armed Forces Journal International  Aero Publishers ISBN 9780816866540 Further reading  Cahill Bill April 2022. Lightning Bugs  Buffalo Hunters The Ryan Model 147 Drone in Vietnam. The Aviation Historian 39 1827. ISSN 20511930 . Hill J.  Rogers A. 2014. The rise of the drones From The Great War to Gaza . Vancouver Island University Arts  Humanities Colloquium Series . Javier GarciaBernardoa Peter Sheridan Dodds Neil F. Johnson 2016. Quantitative patterns in drone wars PDF . Science direct . Archived from the original PDF on 6 February 2016. Rogers A.  Hill J. 2014. Unmanned Drone warfare and global security . Between the Lines. ISBN 9781771131544 External links  Wikimedia Commons has media related to Unmanned aerial vehicles . Wikiquote has quotations related to Drones . How Intelligent Drones Are Shaping the Future of Warfare Archived 2 May 2018 at the Wayback Machine  Rolling Stone Magazine v t e Lists of aircraft By name pre1914 0Ah AiAm AnAz BBe BfBo BrBz CCc CdCn CoCz D E F GGn GoGz H I J K LaLh LiLz M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Gliders List of humanpowered aircraft List of unmanned aerial vehicle Civil aircraft By characteristic Type Aerobatic Bush planes Electric aircraft Flying wings Gliders Humanpowered Pronepilot Rocketpowered Flying boats and floatplanes STOL Supersonic Trimotors Triplanes Unmanned VTOL Fuselage Doubledeck Narrowbody Widebody Weight Size Maximum takeoff weight Light aircraft very light jets Large aircraft Manufacturer Airbus Antonov Boeing Bombardier Douglas  McDonnell Douglas Embraer Ilyushin Tupolev Engine number Twinjets Trijets Trimotors Fourengined jet aircraft Range Jet airliners Regional airliners Use Racers Regional airliner regional jet Research Early flying machines Experimental Xplanes Rotorpowered Rotorcraft utility Tiltrotors Executive Private Business jets Lightsport aircraft Flying car Other lists By date and usage By tail number Mostproduced Military aircraft Role AEW Attack Bomber Torpedo Carrierbased Fighter Maritime patrol Submarineborne Tanker Nation Afghanistan Albania Argentina Australia Bangladesh Belize Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Czech Republic Denmark Egypt Finland France Germany Greece India Indonesia Iran Ireland Israel Italy Japan Malaysia Morocco New Zealand Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Portugal Romania Russia South Africa Spain Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Thailand Turkey United Kingdom United States Era WWI Entente WWI Central Powers Interwar World War II World War II jets v t e Countries producing stealth aircraft Stealth technology United States Experimental Boeing Model 85321 Quiet Bird BoeingSikorsky RAH66 Comanche Boeing Bird of Prey Boeing X32 Boeing X45 F19 Lockheed Have Blue Lockheed YF22 Lockheed Martin FB22 Lockheed Martin X35 Lockheed Martin X44 MANTA McDonnell Douglas A12 Avenger II Northrop Tacit Blue Northrop Grumman X47B Northrop YF23 Fighters Lockheed Martin F22 Raptor Lockheed Martin F35 Lightning II Attack Lockheed F117 Nighthawk Bombers Northrop B2 Spirit Northrop Grumman B21 Raider UAVs General Atomics MQ20 Avenger Boeing MQ25 Stingray Boeing Phantom Ray Lockheed Martin Sea Ghost Lockheed Martin RQ170 Sentinel Northrop Grumman RQ180 Kratos XQ58 Valkyrie General Atomics XQ67A Programs Advanced Tactical Fighter FAXX Joint Strike Fighter Light Helicopter Experimental Long Range Strike Bomber Next Generation Air Dominance NextGeneration Bomber Australia UAVs Boeing MQ28 Ghost Bat China Fighters Chengdu J20 Shenyang FC31 Bombers Xian H20 UAVs Hongdu GJ11 AVIC Dark Sword CAIG Wing Loong10 CASC Rainbow7 FL71 Russia Experimental Yakovlev Yak43 Sukhoi Su47 Mikoyan Project 1.44 Fighters Mikoyan LMFS Mikoyan PAK DP Sukhoi Su57 Sukhoi Su75 Checkmate SukhoiHAL FGFA Bombers Tupolev PAK DA UAVs Mikoyan Skat Sukhoi S70 OkhotnikB United Kingdom Experimental British Aerospace P.125 BAE Systems Replica Fighters Global Combat Air Programme UAVs BAE Systems Taranis Japan Experimental Mitsubishi X2 Shinshin Fighters Global Combat Air Programme Italy Fighters Global Combat Air Programme UAVs Dassault nEUROn India Fighters HAL AMCA SukhoiHAL FGFA UAVs DRDO Ghatak France Fighters Future Combat Air System UAVs Dassault nEUROn Spain Fighters Future Combat Air System UAVs EADS Barracuda Dassault nEUROn Airbus Wingman Germany Experimental MBB Lampyridae Fighters Future Combat Air System UAVs EADS Barracuda Airbus Wingman Sweden Fighters Flygsystem 2020 Turkey Fighters TAI TF Kaan UAVs Bayraktar Kızılelma TAI Anka3 South Korea Fighters KAI KF21 Boramae Iran Fighters IAIO Qaher313 HESA Shafaq Authority control databases National Germany 2 United States France BnF data Czech Republic 2 3 Israel Other NARA